Two issues symbolize the fork in the road that will determine Greensboro’s future: the White Street Landfill and the Downtown Greenway. The landfill separates us; the greenway unites us. We conceive our endorsement slate as a “dream team” comprised of members who will represent all constituencies, work across differences for the common good and demonstrate cooperation and creativity to move our city in a progressive direction.

We enthusiastically recommend Robbie Perkins for mayor. As a seasoned and smart public servant who is plugged in to a wide array of constituencies in Greensboro, he credibly pledges to build a shared vision for the city.

As an at-large councilman seeking reelection two years ago, Perkins accurately predicted that reopening the landfill would tear the city apart. It was a bold position to take at the time; other candidates sat on the fence or signaled their interest in dumping on east Greensboro, never mind the message to the black citizens who predominantly inhabit the neighborhoods that would bear the burden of rodents, odors and uncertainty about possible adverse health effects.

As a result of the ill-considered effort to reopen the landfill, trust has eroded between citizens, confidence in our city’s growth and vitality has diminished, and our best minds have been distracted from addressing staggering economic challenges. Incumbent Mayor Bill Knight has been a consistent vote to reopen the landfill, although it would be charitable to credit him with leadership on the issue.

The greenway will literally link four of the five districts and provide a pedestrian hub connecting downtown to surrounding neighborhoods. It will build community, encourage fitness and spur investment in housing that, in turn, will support bars, art galleries, retail stores and a long awaited downtown grocery.

“We need to move it forward soon as possible because that will create economic development and jobs in center city,” Perkins said during a recent debate. Knight, in turn, said the greenway will “will have to stand in line” with other needs.


On balance, Perkins’ background in commercial real estate is an asset. He understands how economic development is interconnected with transportation and infrastructure. He maintains relationships with lawmakers in Washington and Raleigh, with state transportation officials and with elected leaders in neighboring jurisdictions. In short, he holds the expertise and relationships to make things happen. Progress is risky, but we can’t afford to squander the opportunity to grow and provide opportunities for our citizens.

At-large — Wayne Abraham, Marikay Abuzuaiter, Yvonne Johnson and Nancy Vaughan 


In our primary endorsements, we said that the current leadership on council deserved repudiation because of its insistence on reopening the landfill, based on faulty and suspect motives, and because of its callous disregard for the concerns of the citizens, to whom they are ideally accountable.

The voters spoke louder than we could have predicted, turning out in higher numbers than two years prior and resoundingly supporting candidates who opposed the reopening of the landfill, while consigning pro-landfill incumbent Danny Thompson to fifth place.

Voters need to understand that there are three at-large seats on council. Everyone gets the opportunity to vote in the at-large race, as they do for mayor. We noted before the primary that there were five candidates with strong qualifications, demonstrated commitment and solid track records of service to the community that would provide the course correction needed by the city. The voters agreed with us in broad strokes, but spoke their own minds when it came to individual candidates.

They rejected one of our choices, Cyndy Hayworth, a capable candidate with support among downtown power circles and some neighborhood groups. The electorate apparently punished Hayworth for taking too long to make up her mind about the landfill. In contrast, voters across the city and particularly in east Greensboro gave deafening affirmation to Yvonne Johnson, a former mayor with almost two decades of experience in government and a universe of relationships, and to Marikay Abuzuaiter, a passionate advocate with an extensive record of community service. The voters also placed two candidates that we backed, Nancy Vaughan and Wayne Abraham, on the general-election ballot.

We’re punting in this race: There are three seats, and we’re trusting voters to choose from among four remaining candidates. Our decision comes down to a practical consideration of a set of unique circumstances, and to a concession to reality. We would be happy to work with Yvonne Johnson, Nancy Vaughan, Marikay Abuzuaiter and Wayne Abraham and hold confidence that any of them would do a good job. Johnson and Vaughan are virtually assured seats on council due to popularity and name recognition; the lesser known Abuzuaiter and Abraham share some of the same qualities, and are likely in contention for the third seat, if it can be wrested away from one of the conservatives, who historically hold the best shot at it.

An endorsement for four candidates is necessarily also a recommendation against two candidates. We do not support Thompson, whose credibility has been tarnished in his maiden term by his pursuit of reopening the landfill after telling voters in the last election that he would not be in favor of reopening it, by his funny numbers on the cost savings of reopening the landfill and murky criteria for selecting a company, and by his apparent lack of respect for campaign finance law.

Chris Lawyer has openly stated that he supports reopening the landfill. Credit him with honesty, but this position automatically precludes him from consideration. Lawyer also deserves commendation for pledging to listen to citizens. If he doesn’t win, we’re confident this will not be the last Greensboro has heard from him.

We believe any three of our four recommended candidates would make excellent team players.For strategic purposes we strongly urge you to cast your first two votes for Abuzuaiter and Abraham, and then choose between Johnson and Vaughan for your third selection.

Abuzuaiter has been a warrior in the fight to keep the landfill closed, and has given up countless hours of her time to be responsive to any number of community concerns. Her downto-earth demeanor is rare in politics. A restaurateur, she has insight into the challenges of small business owners. Abuzuaiter is unique among all the candidates in her relationships with people in Greensboro’s diverse immigrant and faith communities. And, as we have learned from recent experience, she is quick to forgive.

Like Abuzuaiter, Abraham has accumulated invaluable experience and expertise through service on the city’s human relations commission. Abraham is possibly the smartest candidate for city council. He has a detailed economic development plan that would enrich a long overdue discussion on council about job creation. He has proposed bold and progressive investments in infrastructure and public transit, and has articulated good ideas about sustainability, which have been sorely missed in the current council.

Johnson’s extensive set of authentic relationships with diverse constituencies across the city would help maintain the citizen buy-in necessary for accountable and representative municipal government. She genuinely cares about ordinary citizens and will work to resolve their problems. Her political alliance with Perkins bodes well for the formation of an effective team, and can be counted as more an asset than a liability.

Vaughan exemplifies open and responsive representation. She actively seeks out perspectives from a wide array of constituencies and likewise actively seeks out the media to explain her decisions, in contrast to other council members who either stonewall journalists or grudgingly release crumbs of information.

All elected officials make mistakes, and Vaughan is not afraid to admit when she makes the wrong call and to set things right. She made the decisive play to keep the landfill closed just before the buzzer sounded.

District 1 — Donnell "DJ" Hardy 


The residents of District 1 need a council member who will fight for them, and Dianne Bellamy-Small has diligently applied herself to filling that role since 2003.

While Bellamy-Small satisfies a number of our criteria for a council member, she refuses to return our calls regardless of the subject — an unacceptable practice for a public official, and a dealbreaker when it comes to our endorsement.

Challenger Donnell "DJ" Hardy has big shoes to fill, but we are confident that he will rise to the challenge. We are attracted to a number of his economic ideas that draw from what has worked for other cities rather than betting everything on attracting outside businesses through incentives, which has led to mixed results.

Hardy is a team player but not at the cost of abandoning his district’s needs, while Bellamy-Small approaches council as a lone ranger prepared for a battle. Hardy may have some fights ahead of him as well, but we expect he will attempt to find the middle ground between other council members and propose forward-thinking solutions.

On the campaign trail, Hardy has repeatedly spoken of his aim for an “urban renaissance” in Greensboro, and his interest in supporting entrepreneurs through a venture capital fund that would support 10 start-up businesses annually out of which two would hopefully have staying power.

Hardy’s challenge is to be more transparent and communicative than his predecessor. Recently, Hardy has harped on the mythical “restaurant tax” as a way to distinguish himself, but if he drops this non-issue and focuses on economic development and other pressing needs of his constituents, we have full confidence in his abilities.

DISTRICT 2 —Jim Kee 


District 2, one of two minority-majority districts in the city, suffers from the blight of empty strip malls and foreclosed homes. There aren’t enough sidewalks, though there are plenty of pedestrians. There is a disproportionate amount of crime as compared to other districts in Greensboro. It has the lowest voter turnout numbers in every election. And ironically, it is home to the White Street Landfill, a major issue in this election.

But we’re not here to beat up on District 2; we are here to endorse its incumbent representative, Jim Kee. Again. Kee got the nod for the primary, and his 70 percent share of the vote virtually assures that he will keep his job — good for the district, because Kee has both business and community service chops, as well as a fairly successful term under his belt, his missteps on the landfill notwithstanding.

And Kee is exactly the kind of council member we want: equally at ease with big-money business types and down-ontheir-luck homesteaders, able to build alliances with just about every other member of council, thoughtful and reasoned in his decisions, not prone to tantrums or grandstanding.

Frankly, we could use a few more like him.

DISTRICT 3 — Jay Ovittore 


This is a tough call. Incumbent Zack Matheny has much to recommend him for re-election. In his two terms he has made alliances with diverse factions on council to get things done. He understands banking, finance and real estate, and has connections in those industries. He says he is “not done yet,” in terms of the things he would like to accomplish for the city, and we believe his heart is in the right place.

Matheny is a throwback, a pristine example of an old-school Greensboro politico whose ties to real estate and business impair his accountability to all citizens. He is also a practitioner of the paternalistic style of governing that we actively seek to end.

On the other hand, Greensboro has never had a councilman like challenger Jay Ovittore, a former rock drummer and current video game salesman — a wage slave, like most of the rest of us. His bona fides are in order, with time on the human relations committee, a previous run for the District 3 seat and a race against Rep. Howard Coble for US Congressional District 6, a year spent as a lobbyist in Raleigh for municipal broadband access and a term as the vice chair for the Guilford County Young Democrats ± though he is in fact a registered independent these days.

The two men are the same age, but have taken completely different paths to this juncture — and that is the deciding factor. If we truly want all of Greensboro represented, then we already have our business and real estate contingency set with Perkins, Kee and Hoffmann. And while there are tens of thousands of people like Ovittore living in the city, they do not have a voice on council — maybe they never have.

Ovittore is smart and feisty; his commitment to government transparency is stronger than that of any other candidate on the slate; and after years bouncing around the fringes of the game, he is ready for elected office.

So after much deliberation, the nod goes to Ovittore.

DISTRICT 4 — Nancy Hoffmann
 
Nancy Hoffmann may be running on the district level, but her outlook demonstrates concern for the entire city, attending the Interactive Resource Center forum and reaching out to NC A&T University students far from her district.

Her concern for the well being of people in all districts is exactly what the her competitor Mary Rakestraw and numerous other council members lack, which was well illustrated by Rakestraw’s self-serving and disingenuous redistricting attempt as well as her support for the divisive landfill struggle. Hoffmann approaches residents from throughout the city as a neighbor, an outlook this council desperately needs.

Hoffmann is smart and urbane, and has been successful in business. She’s lived in big cities and brings that outside perspective, but Hoffmann has lived here for a while and plans to stick around. Good for us. She chairs the human relations commission, which means relevant experience and working relationships with Abraham and Abuzuaiter, who we also support.

Hoffmann holds solid positions on the issues in an election season where some of the candidates don’t even know what the issues are: land use, sustainability, public safety and civility on council chief among them. Hoffmann, Kee and Abraham have placed particular emphasis on sustainable planning and we hope this meeting of the minds could signal a greater emphasis on well thought out, intentional planning. Perkins, a champion of the Downtown Greenway, and the other council members would likely join them.

DISTRICT 5 — Tony Wilkins
 
(write-in) It is longstanding policy around here that if a candidate doesn’t want our endorsement, then she will not get it. We’re talking about Dr. Trudy Wade, the incumbent District 5 representative, who generally ignores our phone calls and interview requests even though our offices are right in the heart of her territory. Though to be fair, we are in almost complete disagreement with Wade’s tactics and decisions during her past two terms, so she would have had to do some pretty fast talking to gain our approval anyway.

The problem is that we cannot endorse her opponent, Jorge Cornell — not because he’s a gangster. He’s not. But his lack of relevant professional experience, impertinence towards the institutions of government — in May he infamously directed members of the Latin Kings to square off against baliffs in a courtroom hallway after being convicted on a misdemeanor resisting charge — and somewhat surly demeanor maker him unsuitable for the position. But we acknowledge that he has come a long was as a citizen and as a candidate, and we applaud his work in the community and encourage him to keep it up. It is worth noting that Cornell was one of just two candidates who wanted to talk to us about the plight of the poor.

Which leaves us in a quandary. Fortunately we have a solution.

We encourage all voting residents of District 5 to write in Tony Wilkins for the seat. We have our reasons.

For one, Wade is widely believed to be eyeing the NC Senate District 27 seat in 2012, and after recent gerrymandering she has a real good shot, which means the council would have to vote on her replacement. Wilkins’ name is on the short list for her post.

He’s got the bona fides as a current member of the War Memorial Commission and veteran of dozens of campaigns as part of the Guilford County GOP, with enough connections, savvy and clout to get things done.

And though some in his own party question his Republicanness, he’s undeniably conservative, providing a reasoned and necessary check to a council loaded with progressives. He won’t get his way very often, but we have confidence he’ll always ask the right questions.

Bill Knight (i) 

Age: 73


Profession: Retired accountant Electoral experience: Mayor, 2009-present Website: knightformayor. com Civic involvement: Board of trustees, Greensboro Opera; parks and recreation commission (past); president (past), Hamilton Lakes Lions Club Key positions: • Favors reopening the White Street Landfill • Supports funding to train new police officers • Opposes tax and water rate increases Quote: “The city enjoys a pretty good financial position, or financial condition. While we hear about a lot of cities and counties, and certainly the national government, that are either just bankrupt or in red ink or in dire straits — and while we are maybe in an enviable position, we need to take every possible precaution to protect and hedge against that proverbial rainy day.” (candidate forum)





Robbie Perkins 

Age: 55 Profession: Commercial real estate broker Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 1993-2005, 2007-present Website: robbieperkins.com Civic involvement: Board of directors, One Step Further; board of trustees, Piedmont Authority for Regional Transportation; member, Heart of the Triad Steering Committee Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Favors regional solid waste solution with Greensboro as anchor tenant of Randolph County landfill • Supports investment in water and sewer infrastructure Quote: “[The Downtown Greenway] gives our citizens an opportunity to exercise. Importantly, it gives our developers an opportunity to link to the greenway to provide an additional amenity to spur economic development. $7 million of the $23 million cost of the greenway is being funded by the private sector.


The balance is a combination of transportation bonds and other city funding sources. We need to move it forward soon as possible because that will create economic development and jobs in center city.” (candidate forum)




Wayne Abraham

Age: 52 Profession: Home-care executive director Electoral experience: None Website: voteabraham.com Civic involvement: Chair, Greensboro Human Relations Commission (past); cofounder, Triad Health Project; Racial Justice and Reconciliation Committee of the Episcopal Diocese of North Carolina (past) Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Supports investments in roads, sidewalks, parks and public transportation • Implement the Sustainability Action Plan and use public land for community gardens Quote: “I hear lots of my fellow candidates say, ‘Government doesn’t create jobs.’ Not true. If we start rebuilding our city’s infrastructure we will be creating jobs. If we turn our city’s efforts towards a ‘Buy Local’ campaign we will be creating jobs. If we put into place the Sustainability Action Plan we will be creating jobs. And if we wisely invest our money into our own economic development partnership we will be creating jobs.” (Facebook post)




Marikay Abuzuaiter

Age: 57 Profession: Restaurant owner Electoral experience: None Website: Facebook Civic involvement: Greensboro Human Relations Commission; active in grassroots effort to keep White Street Landfill closed Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Implement the Sustainability Action Plan • Listen to residents Quote: “We have 20 percent poverty rate in Guilford County. Another item is that 35 percent of the students in our schools are living in poverty. We really need to address these conditions that our people are going through. I would certainly propose and hope that we bring our minds together and come to some solutions in order to create the jobs that will eventually solve all this.” (candidate forum)




Dianne Bellamy-Small

Age: 59 Profession: Nonprofit executive director Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 2003-present Website: bellamysmallforcouncil.com Civic involvement: Has served as a state youth advisor for NC NAACP; worked with Baby Basics program for the Guilford County Coalition on Infant Mortality; honored the Greensboro Red Wings, a Negro League baseball team Key positions: • Opposed to reopening White Street Landfill • Ensuring District 1 receives equitable services and infrastructure investment • Supports Greensboro Coliseum as economic development driver Quote: “There’s an African proverb that says, ‘The lion’s story will never be told so long as the hunter is telling it.’ My leadership style is one of get it done. You’ve got to have someone on council who is a grassroots-er, who gets out here in the community and who can very articulately talk about what’s happening. That’s me.” (candidate forum)




Yvonne Johnson

Age: 69 Profession: Nonprofit executive director Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 1993-2009 (mayor, 2007-2009) Website: yvonnejohnson4citycouncil.com Civic involvement: Board of directors, Golden Leaf Foundation; board member, Greensboro Convention and Visitors Bureau; board member, Malachi House Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Promotes diversity and inclusion • Enhance recreational activities and promote Greensboro as “Tournament Town” Quote: “I’ve read this [Sustainability Action Plan]. It is an excellent plan. I spoke in favor of this plan. And I would hope this council would take it and really study it. And we would talk about it. And if we want to begin at a certain point, fine. But if something’s going to save our city $20 million and it’s not going to cost us anywhere near that, it’s something I think we ought to pay attention to.” (candidate forum)
 



Chris Lawyer 

Age: 33 Profession: Physician assistant Electoral experience: None Website: lawyerforcouncil. com Civic involvement: George Allen and Jon Hardister campaign volunteer, has supported ALS and muscular dystrophy causes Key positions: • Favors reopening White Street Landfill on temporary basis • Promote fiscal restraint • Improve dialogue and respect on council Quote: “If you take the issue and present your case for why you’re for it or against it and you allow comment — everybody, constituents and elected officials — it has to be respectful. People may not like the verdict, but if you listen to the concerns and you’ve talked about them in a respectful dialogue, that’s where you’ll have the greatest benefit.”


 

Danny Thompson (i)

Age: 49 Profession: Home-care business owner Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 2009-present Website: vote4danny.com Civic involvement: Board, Summit Rotary Club; city council liaison to Greensboro Sports Commission; city council liaison to chamber of commerce board of directors Key positions: • Supports reopening the White Street Landfill on limited basis • Supports regional solid waste solution in long term with Greensboro as equity partner in regional landfill • Keep taxes and water rates low Quote: “Hopefully, by now everyone knows where I stand on the landfill. We researched it over the past two years by empirical data as well as the rational input as to what is best, how do you best use an asset that the city has, that the citizens have bought and paid for and permitted. I believe it should have been used for household waste. Of course, I also believe that if were going to not use that landfill, then we need an equity position in a regional solution.” (candidate forum)


 

Nancy Vaughan (i)

Age: 50 Profession: Community volunteer Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 1997-2001, 2009-present Website: electnancyvaughan.com Civic involvement: Board of directors, Reading Connections; board of trustees, Greensboro Day School; Greensboro Beautiful Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Highlight Greensboro’s cultural assets and quality of life • Supports funding for economic development and public safety Quote: “We are really at a crossroads right now as a city. We can dig our heels in and we can keep our extreme left and our extreme right. You know, if we want to be successful we have to come together and we have to be willing to make broad steps. And sometimes broad steps cost money. But you know, we have to consider everything because if we keep just doing business as usual we are going to stagnate.” (candidate forum) 





Donnell (DJ) Hardy

Age: 35 Profession: Financial controller for local environmental company Electoral experience: None Website: donnellhardy.org Civic involvement: Treasurer, Greensboro Jaycees; deacon, St. James Presbyterian Church; board member, Ole Asheboro Neighborhood Association Key positions: • Opposed to reopening White Street Landfill • Ensuring District 1 receives equitable services and infrastructure investment • Favors establishing a venture capital fund to help local startup companies Quote: “The biggest difference is definitely going to be representation and responsiveness. As I alluded to earlier, I don’t think you can really represent someone if you don’t talk to them, not only as a district representative but as a representative of the city. Our campaign has been, I think, relatively a new way of learning about campaigning in District 1. We’ve been very responsive. We have a Twitter account, Facebook. 

And we are going to every single person.” (candidate forum)




Jim Kee (i) 

Age: 53 Profession: Real estate developer Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 2009-present Website: None Civic involvement: Concerned Citizens of Northeast Greensboro; council liaison to human relations commission, Heart of the Triad and Housing Development Partnership Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Emphasis on economic development and transportation infrastructure • Support for city manager and police chief’s handling of challenges in GPD Quote: “There are those — candidates that are running against me — that do not support the police department. I fully support the police department. They’ve asked me to dismantle the gang unit. Now, I personally think that we should have a gang unit.

You know, they’re saying the gang unit is harassing gangs. I call it ‘monitoring.’” m(campaign speech) 





Clarence Bradley Hunt II

Age: 24 Profession: College student Electoral experience: None Website: None Civic involvement: Political affairs chair, Greensboro NAACP; Guilford County Community PAC; mentor, New Light At-Risk Intergenerational Outreach Program Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Establish citizens review board with subpoena power to improve police accountability • Favors increasing taxes to pay for needed services and infrastructure Quote: “I read an article and it said that the councilman was ready to throw in the towel. He said the inner council told him that the landfill would be opened and he was ready to throw in the towel. If you’re not wanting to fight [against] a landfill in your community, in your backyard, then what are you willing to fight for?” (candidate forum)
 



Zack Matheny (i)

Age: 38 Profession: Investor relations manager for a real estate investment and management company Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 2007-present Website: zackmathenyforcouncil.com Civic involvement: Can’t Wait for the Ballpark committee chair and Making Connections Around the Table host, Action Greensboro (past); Future Fund Steering Committee (past); Greensboro Zoning Commission (past) Key positions: • Proponent of Greensboro Aquatic Center and Natural Science Center • Lead effort to establish downtown teen curfew and other downtown public safety initiatives • Varied approach on solid waste, including regional solution Quote: “We’ve got to be down in [Randolph County Commission Commissioner] Darrell Frye’s office every day. We have to get that landfill in Randolph permitted as soon as possible. [NC Senate President Pro Tem] Phil Berger, if he doesn’t want the landfill in Rockingham County, he can help us with the permit in Randolph County. Recycling could build revenue for us. If we can free up the transfer station, we can expand that for recycling.” (interview)


 

Jay Ovittore 

Age: 38

Profession: Sales for video game store Electoral experience: None Website: Facebook Civic involvement: Served on Greensboro Human Relations Commission; paid coordinator, Google Fiber initiative (past); lobbyist for municipal broadband (past) Key positions: • Opposes downtown teen curfew • Supports vigorous enforcement of rental housing ordinances and proactive inspection • Opposes reopening White Street Landfill Quote: “I am first and foremost a citizen of Greensboro. I am not owned and operated by real estate developers. I will not take money from real estate developers. I will not give them a larger seat at the table than any other person sitting in this room today.” (candidate forum)


 

Nancy Hoffmann

Age: 69 Profession: National executive recruiting executive Electoral experience: None Website: votehoffmann.com Civic involvement: Chair, Greensboro Human Relations Commission; board member, Music for a Great Space; former board president, Reading Connections Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Keep options open with regard to tax rate • Support for downtown vitality and culture Quote: “City council must work to protect your greatest investment: your home. That means protecting your home’s value with safe, stable, welcoming neighborhoods. Greensboro is a city of neighborhoods. We don’t want to lose that with the incursion of unwanted rezonings into residential neighborhoods.” (candidate forum)




Mary Rakestraw (i)

Age: 63 Profession: Retired real estate agent/broker Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 2007-present; Guilford County Commission, 1996-2004 Website: maryrakestraw.com Civic involvement: City council liaison to Piedmont Triad Council of Governments; Kiwanis Club of Greensboro; Guilford County Agricultural Advisory Board Key positions: • Favors reopening the White Street Landfill • Opposes tax and water rate increases • Asks the hard questions that you want asked even though you may not like the answers Quote: “I bring experience to this job. When I decided to run we were having serious problems with our police department and our city manager. And to say that we’ve resolved 100 percent with the police department? Not yet. But we’re almost there. I voted to keep your taxes down, to be a good steward of your money. And your water fees, so we could be competitive when we try to bring jobs into Greensboro.” (candidate forum)




Jorge Cornell 

Age: 35 Profession: Staffing agency executive director/ community organizer Electoral experience: None Website: cornellforcouncil. wordpress.com Civic involvement: Guilford County Coalition for Just Laws and Peace Among Street Organizations; activist against unjust immigration laws and police harassment; creating employment opportunities for ex-felons Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Open up city’s small business loan program to ex-felons • Establish a citizens review board with subpoena power to hold police accountable Quote: “The power is in our hands. The power is when we go show up to these voting polls and vote. If you want money [to flow] into your neighborhood, you have to elect the right people into office — you just can’t turn your back. If you turn your back, then the rich [are] going to keep getting richer. The nice communities are going to keep looking prettier and our communities are going to look the same.” (interview)




Trudy Wade (i) 

Age: 58 Profession: Veterinarian Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 2007-present; Guilford County Commission, 2000-2005 Website: trudywade.com Civic involvement: American Business Women’s Association, past president; Association of North Carolina Boards of Health, past director; Friends Home Board of Advisors, former member Key positions: • Favors reopening White Street Landfill • Opposed to increasing tax rates and water rates • Ensuring District 5 receives equitable services and capital investment Quote: “The problem with the landfill is our trash is costing us millions of dollars. There were conservative members of council that decided we needed to look at this issue for the people of Greensboro — all the people of Greensboro. Is there a way we could save money and with that money do things for economic development such as put in infrastructure, do things we really need in this city? Are we getting the best bang for our buck with paying all that money to transport our trash, which is our responsibility, not our responsibility to go stick it in somebody else’s backyard — our responsibility as citizens that we should take care of our own trash.”

Assuming a new city council reaches an agreement on what to do about solid waste early in the next term, the budget is likely to be the major challenge in the next two years. Revenues are likely to be lower than hoped for because of the depressed housing market, while services and infrastructure remain in demand. Mayoral challenger Robbie Perkins would like to move forward with the Downtown Greenway. At-large challenger Wayne Abraham wants to repair city roads. District 3 challenger Jay Ovittore wants to hire additional police officers.

No surprise that the four conservative incumbents on council, including Mayor Bill Knight, have pledged to not raise taxes or water rates, as documented in a video clip produced by Conservatives for Guilford County. At-large incumbent Danny Thompson and at-large challenger Chris Lawyer also took the pledge. Mayoral challenger Robbie Perkins has left his options open when asked the question.

“It’s a qualified maybe answer,” said Perkins when asked during a candidate forum hosted by the Greater Greensboro Republican Women’s Club on Oct. 25 if he would vote to raise taxes. Asked if he would raise water rates and if he would cut spending, he responded, “It depends.”

Abraham may be the only challenger that has campaigned against cutting taxes, calling the council vote in 2010 to cut property taxes by a quarter of cent, “a jobs-killing tax cut.” He argues that the reduction had an insignificant impact on taxpayers, but stripped the city budget with the result that council cut funding to the Greensboro Partnership, which works to recruit new businesses to the city.

Only one candidate has expressed active interest in raising taxes.

“I don’t believe we can move Greensboro forward if we keep our taxes the way they are,” District 2 challenger C. Bradley Hunt II told an audience at the downtown public library for a forum hosted by the Greensboro Neighborhood Congress on Oct. 24. “I am a citizen and I believe that everyone wants to keep taxes low. It makes us all comfortable. But in order for us to spur economic development, in order for us to improve our infrastructure and to improve our services we must look for new ways to generate income for the city. So I believe we have to look at new ways that we may increase our tax rate so we can provide services for our citizens. So I think that in order to improve our services and infrastructure, in order to increase our police department, fire services, and also to give small business owners and minority business owners a chance to compete, we must look at ways to raise taxes.”

Incumbent Jim Kee was happy to take the opposing side on the issue.

“Certainly I would not advocate raising taxes,” he said. “Matter of fact, I voted to lower taxes. In this type of economy, citizens could not afford any increase in taxes. The way we can expand the revenue in Greensboro is to bring more businesses, to create more small businesses right here in our city. And that’s exactly what I have been doing.”

Kee, a developer, said he worked with Kotis Properties to open the H&F cafeteria at the corner of Church Street and Pisgah Church Road, creating 60 jobs. He said he has also worked with Kotis Properties to open Pace Medical at the intersection of East Cone Boulevard and Summit Avenue, which employs 30 people.

“That’s the way we keep taxes low and keep services great in Greensboro,” Kee said.

Zack Matheny, a registered Republican seeking reelection to the District 3 seat, told the audience at the Greater Greensboro Republican Women’s Club Forum that he would not vote to raise taxes. One day earlier he gave a somewhat more qualified answer to the Greensboro Neighborhood Congress.

“I don’t know, quite honestly, what’s going to happen with taxes,” he said. “My goal would be to not increase taxes. I’ve said that and we’ve been able to accomplish that by not increasing and actually have a very small, slight decrease for the city. One of our major issues is going to be real estate valuations in the next couple years.”

Historically, home values have appreciated over all, with the result that local governments can cut the tax rate and maintain neutral revenue. Real estate is revalued every eight years, and Guilford County is due for a revaluation next year. If, as expected, property values have depreciated overall because of the foreclosure and housing crisis, then local governments will have to choose between increasing the rate to maintain neutral revenue or cutting spending to compensate for reduced revenue at the current rate.

After the candidate forum Matheny said in an interview that his ultimate objective is to keep the tax bill flat, whatever that requires.

Jay Ovittore, who is challenging Matheny for the District 3 seat, stressed spending needs.

“I don’t want to make promises that I can’t keep, so I don’t want to say that I’m not going to vote to raise taxes, if necessary,” he said. “We need 200 more police officers on our police force. We need more fire people. We need our roads taken care of. We need to upgrade the Osborne water treatment plan so we can handle a capacity that’s almost near full at this point and continue to bring clean water to our communities. So that money’s going to come from somewhere. We can either get creative and do something about the landfill: Keep it closed, make it a regional solution, maybe own a regional solution, maybe cut off some of that as a portfolio, do some waste to energy. And if we spend the money on waste to energy now, that waste to energy is going to make us back millions more. And if I can keep your tax rate flat, I’ll do that. But I simply don’t know until I have the numbers in front of me.”

Mary Rakestraw, the conservative District 4 incumbent, has consistently pledged that she will not vote to raise taxes.

“With the present economy that we have we’ve got to be good stewards of your money and my money,” she said. “And I pay taxes, too. And this is a situation, y’all, that we cannot go the well but so many times. You have a budget in your own home. And you have to look at how you spend your money. And when you don’t have enough money, what do you do?... And, you know, I bet you even if you go home this coming week and you say, ‘What could I cut out that would not hurt my lifestyle, what would it be?’ Surely there is something. And we’re going to have to look at that as we go into the next two years. We have to be smart. We have to be prudent. And again, y’all, I cannot say this enough: We cannot tax ourselves out of this situation that we’re in at the present.”

Like Ovittore, District 4 challenger Nancy Hoffmann emphasized spending needs, prefacing her remarks by saying she is “committed to sound financial stewardship.”

“No one can predict the future,” she said. “So we really have to see what the situation is next year or the following year, but we know that we have possibly deferred some very important maintenance in this city. Those things catch up with you sometime down the road, and when they do the cost may be greater. We bear the cost of training the police staff and the fire staff in this city. And if we lose them a year or two years after we train them, then we have lost the cost of that investment in those people, and they’ve gone to High Point, or to Burlington, or Reidsville for another thousand dollars a year.” 

Hoffmann said that a city, like any business, must “drill down” to see what spending items are “not absolutely essential” during difficult economic times, and have an honest conversation with citizens about what services they want to maintain, what they’re willing to give up, and what they’re willing to pay for.

Trudy Wade, the conservative incumbent in District 5, said she would not raise taxes. 

“There’s two ways not to raise taxes,” she said. “And no, I wouldn’t raise taxes. Two ways to do that. Either you’re going to have to cut things or you’re going to have to bring in more jobs, more people, and increase your base of people paying in. There’s only two ways to do it. I think we’ve tried as a council to bring more jobs here. And I think we’ve done a pretty good job of that. For 12 of 16 years the unemployment rate’s been going up. This last year it’s started to go down again.” 

In fact, data for the Greensboro-High Point metropolitan statistical area posted by the NC Employment Security Commission indicates that the unemployment rate increased in eight of the past 16 years. The rate has been declining over all over the past two years, but has remained at above 10 percent since 2009 after bouncing between 3 percent and 7 percent during the period from 1996 to 2008.

Wade credited the city council’s efforts to keep property taxes and water rates low with what progress has been seen in reducing the unemployment rate. During her remarks the councilwoman linked the tax rate to efforts to reopen the White Street Landfill, which she favors.

“If we were using our own landfill, we could save $8 million a year,” she said. “We won’t talk about the $30- or $40 million we’ve lost over the past four or five years.”

The $8 million figure tossed around by Wade, Thompson and The Rhinoceros Times is at odds with the $3.1 million per year in annual cost savings estimated by the city’s solid waste consultant for the plan to reopen the landfill that was adopted by the conservative faction. The difference can be chalked up to closure costs once the currently permitted portions of the landfill are depleted. Those who cite the $8 million figure argue that closure costs should not be included because the landfill would eventually have to be closed anyway. But under the current arrangement, the permitted portion of the landfill accepts a miniscule amount of screening, allowing it to remain open indefinitely.

Wade blamed a group of citizens who filed suit against the city to prevent the landfill from reopening with scuttling the city’s ability to pursue a regional approach, recycling, waste-to-energy technology, investments in infrastructure and cost savings.

“And we tried to take a regional approach,” she said. “And we tried to take the companies on the cutting edge of waste management and bring them into an RFP, and say, ‘What can you do for this community with technology, with recycling, and do a long-range plan for us.’ This is the first council that really stood back and said, ‘Let’s take a look at that.’ What can we do to cut this $8 million-a-year cost? And, of course, we ended up in a lawsuit, so all that technology, infrastructure, all that additional money we were going to have for the city, of course that won’t be the case now.” 

Districts 1 and 3 have no primary. District 1 candidates Dianne Bellamy-Small (i) and Donnell “DJ” Hardy, District 3 candidates Zack Matheny (i) and Jay Ovittore, and District 5 candidates Trudy Wade (i) and Jorge Cornell will appear on the general election ballot in November. 

Note: i = incumbent 


BILL KNIGHT (I) 

Age: 73

Profession: Retired accountant 


Electoral experience: Mayor, 2009-present 

Website: knightformayor. com 

Civic involvement: Board of trustees, Greensboro Opera; parks and recreation commission (past); president (past), Hamilton Lakes Lions Club 


Key positions: • Favors reopening the White Street Landfill • Supports funding to train new police officers • Opposes tax and water rate increases 


Quote: “The city enjoys a pretty good financial position, or financial condition. While we hear about a lot of cities and counties, and certainly the national government, that are either just bankrupt or in red ink or in dire straits — and while we are in maybe an enviable position, we need to take every possible precaution to protect and hedge against that proverbial rainy day.” (candidate forum)




BRADFORD CONE

Age: 31

Profession: Paramedic

Electoral experience: None

 Website: None 


Civic involvement: Vice president of operations, Worlds Apart One Heart; volunteer, Anizade, HealthServe and Habitat for Humanity

Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Investigate allegations of corruption in GPD • Enhance investment in city’s greenway network 


Quote: “What we need to do is make sure the police understand the implications of the actions they take. We also need to make sure they communicate with the communities so that we can alleviate the problem or the perception of a problem. And we also need to investigate if there is racial discrimination because we can’t allow that in the police department or anywhere in the city.” (candidate forum)




ROBBIE PERKINS

Age: 55 



Profession: Commercial real estate broker 


Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 1993-2005, 2007-present 

Website: robbieperkins.com 

Civic involvement: Board of directors, One Step Further; board of trustees, Piedmont Authority for Regional Transportation; member, Heart of the Triad Steering Committee 


Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Favors regional solid waste solution with Greensboro as anchor tenant of Randolph County landfill • Supports investment in water and sewer infrastructure 


Quote: “We want to try to create the kind of jobs that are going to be a living wage for people because it’s awfully hard to live off of minimum wage. You can’t work enough hours in the day to do that. So we’ve got to create the kind of jobs that are going to pay reasonable money so that you can support your families and keep a little bit for retirement.” (campaign speech)




CHRIS PHILLIPS

Age: 45

Profession: Sales

Electoral experience: None 


Website: chrisphillips.us 


Civic involvement: Presenter, People First Spending Reform Summit; author, Take Over Liberalism in America

 Key positions: • Favors reopening White Street Landfill on condition that city establishes there are no adverse impacts on residents • Greensboro needs more jobs • Eliminate wasteful government spending 


Quote: “I’m not a politician. I’m a real, working person. Having been through some struggles in life, I want to be a voice for people who have been through the same things. I’ve been homeless. I’ve been unemployed. If Greensboro stays the way it is, what kind of jobs are we going to have? When college students graduate, where are they going to work?”




TOM PHILLIPS

Age: 65

Profession: Financial advisor 


Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 1989-1993, 1999-2007

 Website: tomphillipsformayor.com 


Civic involvement: Director, Piedmont Triad Regional Water Authority; board member and cofounder, Guilford Battleground Company; zoning commission (past) 


Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Restore civility and transparency on city council • Supports investment in water and sewer infrastructure 


Quote: “Regionalism is not easy. It takes a lot of work. And one of the things that you really have to do is respect the politics of your neighbors.”


 
NANCY VAUGHAN (I)
 
Age: 50
 
Profession: Community volunteer
 
Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 1997-2001, 2009-present Website: electnan- cyvaughan.com
 
Civic involvement: Board of directors, Reading Connections; board of trustees, Greensboro Day School; Greensboro Beautiful
 
Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Highlight Greensboro’s cultural assets and quality of life • Supports funding for economic development, public safety
 
Quote: “We are really at a crossroads right now as a city. We can dig our heels in and we can keep our extreme left and our extreme right. You know, if we want to be successful we have to come together and we have to be willing to make broad steps. And sometimes broad steps cost money. But you know, we have to consider everything because if we keep just doing business as usual we are going to stagnate.” (candidate forum)
 

DANNY THOMPSON (I)
 
Age: 49
 
Profession: Home care business owner
 
Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 2009-present
 
Website: vote4danny.com
 
Civic involvement: Board, Summit Rotary Club; city council liaison to Greensboro Sports Commission; city council liaison to chamber of commerce board of directors
 
Key positions: • Supports reopening White Street Landfill on limited basis • Supports regional solid waste solution in long term with Greensboro as equity partner • Keep taxes and water rates low
 
Quote: “I believe [the White Street Landfill] should have been used for household waste. Of course, I also believe that if were going to not use that landfill, then we need an equity position in a regional solution.” (candidate forum)


 

WAYNE ABRAHAM

Age: 52

Profession: Home care executive director 


Electoral experience: None 


Website: voteabraham.com 


Civic involvement: Chair, Greensboro Human Relations Commission (past); cofound- er, Triad Health Project; Racial Justice and Reconciliation Committee of the Episcopal Diocese of North Carolina (past) 


Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Supports investments in roads, sidewalks, parks and transit • Implement the Sustainability Action Plan and use public land for community gardens 


Quote: “I would respect the citizens who serve on the vari- ous commissions and boards that city council appoints people to. Those people volunteer a great deal of their time, and they give of themselves, and they care deeply about our city. And when they come to the city council to make a report, it should be listened to and respected.” (candidate forum)


MARIKAY ABUZUAITER

Age: 57

Profession: Restaurant owner 


Electoral experience: None 


Website: Facebook 


Civic involvement: Greensboro Human Relations Commission; active in grassroots effort to keep White Street Landfill closed 


Key position: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill 


Quote: “[In] 2009, Danny Thompson went to east Greensboro and told 5-, 6-, 700 people that he would never vote to open the landfill. Well, what happened when he got on council? He was the main one wanting to get the landfill open. So I am calling him out. Because if he had not been at east Greensboro and made that promise, I would have been on your city council and we would have never gotten the votes that they wanted to open the landfill.” (campaign speech)




DEBORAH FAE BROGDEN

Age: 52

Profession: Artist/writer/ entrepreneur 


Electoral experience: None 


Website: None 


Civic involvement: None 


Key position: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill 


Quote: “I did not know there were racial tensions, unprofessionalism, etc. with the GPD." (questionnaire response)




JEAN AUSTIN BROWN

Age: 71

Profession: Retired travel agent 


Electoral experience: None

 Website: None 


Civic involvement: Pianist and Sunday school teacher, Rehobeth Baptist Church 


Key position: • Opposes increases to tax and water rates

 Quote: “Nobody has the answer to the landfill. I don’t think so. I’ve listened to everything. I’ve read everything I can about the landfill. I don’t think anybody has the answer yet. But I’m open to suggestions. Even when I’m on city council I would not be against town-hall meetings if all possible participants were there to voice their concerns, whether it’s yes or no. But I’m not for listening to just a bunch of folks who are angry and who are not willing to listen and to try to do something about this.” (candidate forum)



 

CLARENCE EASTER

Age: 37

Profession: Teacher assistant

Electoral experience: None 


Website: Facebook 


Civic involvement: Volunteered for both Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama’s presidential campaigns in 2008, and for various local Democratic candidates’ campaigns 


Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Supports strong-manager form of government 


Quote: “One of the biggest things I believe in is collaboration. I believe in collaboration not just with city council members; also with everybody, starting with our citizens, our employees. Don’t stop with us as far as trying to bring change. I believe also in collaborating with our county commissioners, our state officials — sorry, our federal officials, because there’s a lot of ideas out there, and we also need to educate our citizens on how to ask questions.” (candidate forum) 





CYNDY HAYWORTH

Age: 61

Profession: Nonprofit president 


Electoral experience: None 

Website: cyndyhayworth. com 


Civic involvement: Chair, Greensboro Zoning Commission, sat on citizens review committee with input on selection of police Chief Ken Miller in 2010; advisory board, Fun Fourth Festival, 2010 


Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Support for neighborhood stability • Professional conduct by city council 


Quote: “My solution to the solid waste problem is to renegotiate the contract…. They’ve already said they can do what they’re doing for less money, therefore saving the taxpayers money. Get to the table and start building the relationships with Randolph and Rockingham counties. Stay on top of the technology bubble.... My answer would be in no manner open up the White Street Landfill.” (candidate forum)


 

HAYDEN J. JESSERER

Age: 25

Profession: Pharmaceutical sales 


Electoral experience: None 


Website: None 


Civic involvement: Volunteer for Obama campaign, 2008; Little League coach with Raleigh Parks and Recreation Department (past)


 

YVONNE JOHNSON

Age: 68

Profession: Nonprofit executive director

Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 1993-2009 (mayor, 2007- 2009) 


Website: yvonnejohnson4citycouncil.com

 Civic involvement: Board of directors, Golden Leaf Foundation; board member, Greensboro Convention and Visitors Bureau; board member, Malachi House 


Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Promotes diversity and inclusion • Enhance recreational activities and promote Greensboro as “Tournament Town”

Quote: “I grew up in a time when Greensboro was very divided, and fought very hard to squash that division. And I don’t ever want to see that happen in Greensboro again.” (candidate forum) 





CHRIS LAWYER

Age: 33

Profession: Physician assistant 


Electoral experience: None 


Website: lawyerforcouncil. com 


Civic involvement: George Allen and Jon Hardister campaign volunteer, has supported ALS and muscular dystrophy causes

 Key positions: • Favors reopening White Street Landfill on temporary basis • Promote fiscal restraint • Improve dialogue and respect on council 


Quote: “If you take the issue and present your case for why you’re for it or against it and you allow comment — everybody, constituents and elected officials — it has to be respectful. People may not like the verdict, but if you listen to the concerns and you’ve talked about them in a respectful dialogue, that’s where you’ll have the greatest benefit.” (interview) 





SAL LEONE

Age: 40

Profession: Police officer

Electoral experience: None 


Website: leoneforcouncil. com 


Civic involvement: Volunteer, NC Zoo; Presidential Service Award, 2006; city of Thomasville Employee of the Year, 2005 


Key positions: • Opposes reopening White Street Landfill • City manager must be accountable to council • Council must have trustworthy, honest leadership 


Quote: “If we can develop the east, our economic boom will be unlimited. I think that’s why I’m so against the landfill. Nobody’s going to bring big business if you have a dump there. That’s just common sense. The only company that can survive there is probably Terminix.” (candidate forum)
 

CHRISTOPHER N. MCLAUGHLIN

Age: 51

Profession: Nonprofit executive director 


Electoral experience: None 


Website: None 


Civic involvement: Volunteering experience in food program, transitional housing and landlord-tenant mediation 


Key positions: • Appears to take a dim view of reopening White Street Landfill •Bring unity to city council 


Quote: “All police personnel should be required to go through a sensitivity course. Our city has such a large mix of races, ethnicities and religions. The Greensboro Police Department has the unenviable job of trying to maintain law, peace and order in an atmosphere where there will always be racial tension. Professionalism, integrity and fairness should be prerequisites before hiring.” (questionnaire response) 





MARLANDO DEMONTE PRIDGEN

Age: 28

Profession: Nonprofit executive director

 Electoral experience: None

 Website: None 


Civic involvement: Greensboro Landmark Project, lobbying to keep student tuition down, public transit advocate 


Key positions: • Council should be proactive in seeking citizen input 


Quote: “I think when you vote, one of the things you have to look at with this past council is you’re voting on a mentality of government. There’s a mentality on council that they don’t believe the citizens’ input is worthy [of being involved in] government. So as a result, when they come to council meetings, their judgment and their decisions has over and over voted to not listen to the people. I suggest that you have to have it. So practically, how do we do this? You have to have town-hall meetings on more issues.” (candidate forum) 





JIM KEE (I)

Age: 53

Profession: Real estate developer 


Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 2009-present 


Website: None

 Civic involvement: Concerned Citizens of Northeast Greensboro; council liaison to human relations commission, Heart of the Triad and Housing Development Partnership 


Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Emphasis on economic development and transportation • Support for city manager and police chief’s handling of challenges in GPD

 Quote: “There are those — candidates that are running against me — that do not support the police department. I fully support the police department. They’ve asked me to dismantle the gang unit. Now, I personally think that we should have a gang unit. You know, they’re saying the gang unit is harassing gangs. I call it ‘monitoring.’” (campaign speech)


 

DAN FISCHER

Age: 49

Profession: Real estate investor 


Electoral experience: None

 Website: None 


Civic involvement: Chapel Ridge homeowners association and neighborhood watch, transformational workshops, helping refugees 


Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Work with banks to abate foreclosure crisis • Install sidewalks in underserved areas of city

 Quote: “Even though I want a win-win situation, if I have to, I will get down and dirty. I will put my foot down. I will work with anybody to get the answers I want. Working with the Marines, I found ways to go through them, over, under, around, and to blast a hole in it. I am willing to do most anything to see what is right for a community, happen.” (candidate forum)


 

CLARENCE BRADLEY HUNT II

Age: 24

Profession: College student

Electoral experience: None 

Website: None

Civic involvement: Political affairs chair, Greensboro NAACP; Guilford County Community PAC, mentor, New Light At-Risk Intergenerational Outreach Program

Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Establish citizens review board with subpoena power to improve police accountability • Adopt a progressive city tax rate 


Quote: “I believe that the Greensboro Police Department cannot continue to investigate itself. We need a citizens review board with subpoena power. We have to get citizens involved in the Greensboro Police Department or we will still see corruption; we will still see mistreatment, harassment and discrimination.” (candidate forum) 





MARY RAKESTRAW (I) 

Age: 63 


Profession: Retired real estate agent/broker 


Electoral experience: Greensboro City Council, 2007-present; Guilford County Commission, 1996- 2004 


Website: maryrakestraw.com 


Civic involvement: City council liaison to Piedmont Triad Council of Governments; Kiwanis Club of Greensboro; Guilford County Agricultural Advisory Board 

Key positions: • Favors reopening the White Street Landfill • Opposes tax and water rate increases 


Quote: “We have to be careful with our money. We have to balance our budget. We have to save for a rainy day. But we cannot continue to tax people, and in the four years that I have been on the city council we have not had a tax increase. And that’s important because we can’t keep going to the well. Because y’all can’t keep going to the well.” (candidate forum) 





TONY COLLINS

Age: 53

Profession: General contractor 


Electoral experience: None 


Website: electtonycollins. com

Civic involvement: Chair, Greensboro Zoning Commission (past); Market Advisory Board, RBC Bank; member, Greensboro Regional Realtor Association

Key positions: • Focus on job creation, put aside divisive issues that are distracting • Accessible and forthright leadership • Balance development with respect for neighborhoods 


Quote: “I think some on the council have kind of lost their way. I think everybody starts with the best intentions. We’ve gotten into some of the nit-picky, petty type things that can go on…. The council cannot affect a lot of jobs, but we can certainly lay some great groundwork, and lay the circumstances to build a better economy and bring some jobs.” (campaign speech) 


NANCY HOFFMANN 

Age: 69 


Profession: National execu- tive recruiting executive 


Electoral experience: None 

Website: votehoffmann.com 

Civic involvement: Chair, Greensboro Human Relations Commission; board member, Music for a Great Space; for- mer board president, Reading Connections 

Key positions: • Opposes reopening of White Street Landfill • Keep options open with regard to tax rate • Support for downtown vitality and culture 


Quote: “City council must work to protect your great est investment: your home. That means protecting your home’s value with safe, stable, welcoming neighborhoods. Greensboro is a city of neighborhoods. We don’t want to lose that with the incursion of unwanted rezonings into resi- dential neighborhoods.” (candidate forum) 









YES! Endorsements 

MAYOR— Robbie Perkins

 The mayor of Greensboro gets one vote that counts no more or less than any other council member. The role is supervisory — the mayor sets the agenda and runs the council meetings. He’s a quarterback. A leader. And though he gets just a single vote, he is expected to guide the council through the most pressing issues the city faces. 


We quickly narrowed our list down to sitting at-large Councilman Robbie Perkins and former at-large Councilman Tom Phillips. Challengers Chris Phillips, who was formerly homeless, and Bradford Cone, who is the only registered Democrat in the race, have good ideas but are still unformed as political leaders. And current Mayor Bill Knight has basically been incommunicado with our paper since he took office two years ago; he ditched our candidate interview request as well as the News & Record’s news and editorial board interview invitations, and has been conspicuously absent thus far in forums and debates. Let’s be real: There is no way this guy would get our endorsement on pure principle, regardless of his votes and views, many of which we also disagree with. We could do a lot worse than elect Tom Phillips as mayor. He understands the issues and the mechanisms of municipal government. He is on the right side of the landfill debate, and seems to make sound decisions, albeit with a decidedly fiscally conservative bent. He’s not conservative enough for many GOP voters this time around — not a big concern to us but it will cost him a few votes that will likely go into Knight’s column.

A bigger problem for him is his competitor, Robbie Perkins.

Perkins has been in the game a long time, and he is easily the best politician of anyone running this year. He has con- nections in state and federal government as well as county and city associations that reach into every neighborhood and demographic. Some deride Perkins’ deal-making prowess by saying that his fingers are constantly chapped from trying to see which way the wind is blowing, but we don’t see politi- cal awareness, necessarily, as a negative.

Fact is, Perkins understands Greensboro like few other citizens — where it’s come from, where it’s headed, its geography and economic currents, its role in the state’s evo- lution. He’s got his hands in land use, transportation, educa- tion, regionalism, urban planning… plus he placed third 

overall in this year’s Run for the Greenway. And Perkins has vision. He spoke to us about economic growth in the east after the urban loop comes in, sensible and long-term water and sewer developments, the signifi- cance of the Piedmont Triad Regional Airport and the High Point Road corridor.

“In 50 years,” he said to us, “I want those guys to look back [on what we put in p[lace] and say, ‘Man, those guys were smart.’” For these reasons and more, Robbie Perkins gets the nod.

AT LARGE — Wayne Abraham, Cyndy Hayworth, Nancy Vaughan 


The current leadership of the council, which has undertaken an ill-conceived effort to reopen the White Street Landfill based on faulty and suspect motives and turned a deaf ear to the concerns of citizens, deserves to be repudiated at the polls. Greensboro needs practical, forward-thinking leadership, and council members who will engage in an open, deliberative process to make the best decisions for all constituencies across the city. That means listening, diligent research, mutual respect and a generous spirit of give and take.

To be clear, the city council needs a dramatic course correction. There are five candidates with strong qualifications, demonstrated commitment and solid track records of service to the community. If there were five at-large seats available, we would probably include Yvonne Johnson and Marikay Abuzuaiter in our endorsement slate. But with Nancy Vaughan, Cyndy Hayworth and Wayne Abraham, voters have an opportunity to move past some of the petty rivalries and old patterns that have frustrated progress in our city.

Nancy Vaughan has displayed admirable moxie in fighting to keep the landfill closed. She hasn’t always made the right decisions, but she’s humble enough to own up to mistakes and make amends. Such was the case when she voted in favor of a blatantly gerrymandered redistricting plan without adequate public review. In response to a public outcry, Vaughan announced two days later that she would make a motion to reconsider. In our business we deal with elected officials who dodge uncomfortable questions and sometimes fail to return phone calls. Not only does Vaughan return calls, she often calls us first.

She’s a political moderate who is interested in making government more efficient. She has also forged a strong relationship with the Interactive Resource Center, and has come to embrace the value proposition of helping homeless people get back on their feet and become productive members of society again.

In short, Vaughan is a thoughtful policymaker who demonstrates openness and honesty in her communications, and actively forges relationships with a wide array of constituencies. You can ask for no more in an at-large representative.

Wayne Abraham holds a long track record of service to the community. He’s smart and thoughtful. He’s a successful business owner and one who displays compassion for the least of these. He knows how to work with people to get things done. Abraham may not be a household name in Greensboro politics like Yvonne Johnson, but no less than former mayors Keith Holliday and Carolyn Allen have recognized his strengths.

Abraham co-founded Triad Health Project in the mid-1980s. He worked for years behind the scenes to prod the city manager’s office to implement domestic partnership benefits for city employees. He chaired the citizens review board, part of his responsibilities as chair of the human relations commission. 

Finally, Abraham is a visionary — a quality in short supply on council in recent years — with innovative ideas for making Greensboro a better city. He’s one of the few candidates talking about enhancing public transportation, adopting the Sustainability Action Plan and putting cityowned land to use as community gardens to meet local food needs.

Cyndy Hayworth came relatively late to her position of opposing the reopening of the White Street Landfill, but she arrived at the right position and she persuasively articulates why the landfill is bad for Greensboro. Some might read in her initial neutrality a lack of conviction, but it actually reflects a quality that recommends her for leadership.

Hayworth comes across as open-minded, as someone who takes the time to research decisions and as someone who talks to a wide range of people to gauged the broad implications of her actions. That’s a positive: If you have too many people on council with hardened positions, you end up with scorched-earth outcomes that are lose-lose propositions for everyone. And her diligence has been demonstrated as a member of the zoning commission — she’s now the chair — where she tells voters she has visited every subject property to get a sense of how redevelopment will affect the surrounding neighborhood. It follows that such sensitivity to residents’ qualityof-life concerns would lead the candidate to oppose the reopening of the landfill.

Hayworth has taken strong stands for preserving the integrity of established neighborhoods and for making sure Greensboro has an ample reserve fund for infrastructure investment so the city can compete effectively for jobs.

We also look to her for transactional leadership: She might be the kind of person who would see the value of a community garden program, but would ask the tough questions about cost to taxpayers and accountability, so that the ultimate outcome is even better than before. We also may not agree with her on every position — her opposition to council’s 2009 expression of regret for the Klan-Nazi killings is a case in point — but that’s okay. As long as leaders demonstrate thoughtfulness in their deliberations and explain their decisions, that meets our requirements.

DISTRICT 2 — Jim Kee 


The District 2 campaign has been perhaps the most lively of the contested district races. Challengers C. Bradley Hunt II and Dan Fischer are to be commended for enriching the race. Hunt is an impressive, young man with strong potential who has proven his ability to defend bold and well-researched positions. He offers an appealing alternative to voters, particularly on issues of police accountability. Fischer is a thoughtful and committed community member who has some interesting ideas.

Ultimately, we have to endorse the incumbent, Jim Kee. First, a caveat: Kee has acknowledged that he made a tactical misstep in efforts to block the reopening of the White Street Landfill, which is located in District 2. Community activists rather than their elected representative provided the decisive leadership in this fight.

Now, on to the good stuff: Kee understands roadway connectivity, economic development and how the two are related to the landfill. He holds a long track record of service to the community, not incidentally, including leadership to close the landfill 10 years ago. He handles himself with finesse and a common touch. The council needs more like him:

elected representatives who are principled, but work to find common ground to advance common goals for the city.

DISTRICT 4 — Nancy Hoffmann 


When we say we are looking for change on council, one of the places we’re targeting is District 4, where for the last two years Mary Rakestraw has been operating in lockstep with her faction without regard for her constituents nor, in our opinion, the greater good of the city. We barely agree with Rakestraw on anything, though we do commend her for coming into the YES! Weekly offices, essentially hostile political territory, to make her case in her endorsement interview.

Which leaves us with Tony Collins and Nancy Hoffmann.

Collins is a solid candidate: a contractor with some big projects under his belt who understands business and real estate without seeming to be beholden to industry. Plus he’s sharp and affable, and says he’s willing to listen to all viewpoints before casting votes.

Collins’ biggest problem is that he’s running against Nancy Hoffmann, who comes with genuine public-service bona fides as chair of the human relations commission with some time on the complaint review committee. Plus she is an urbane, intellectual, business-savvy humanitarian who brings a wealth of realworld experience to council.

Hoffmann holds solid positions on the issues in an election season where some of the candidates don’t even know what the issues are: land use, sustainability, public safety and civility on council chief among them.

Not only do we endorse Nancy Hoffmann for District 4, we would endorse her for just about anything.

City Councilman Jim Kee took the fight to his two challengers last night at Presbyterian Church of the Cross in northeast Greensboro during an intimate and candid series of exchanges in which candidates nearly outnumbered citizens.

Kee posed a question to C. Bradley Hunt II, the youngest of three candidates seeking the District 2 seat on council, and his toughest critic.

“What are you currently doing to bring economic development to District 2?” asked Kee, who is a real estate developer by profession.

“Let’s be honest here,” Hunt responded. “I know that you are in business and that you are a business person. That is what you were supposed to bring to council. However, that is not my thing. Once I get on council it will be quite easy for me with my leadership skills, with my zeal, with my enthusiasm, with my fresh approach and fresh perspective to do anything that needs to be done.”

Kee then made a preemptive strike, drawing out the policy issue in which he differs most dramatically with Hunt.

“I happen to think we have an excellent police department,” he said. “Crime has steadily gone down…. What is your position on the Greensboro Police Department?”

Hunt responded, “I believe that the Greensboro Police Department cannot continue to investigate itself. We need a citizens review board with subpoena power. We have to get citizens involved in the Greensboro Police Department or we will still see corruption; we will still see mistreatment, harassment and discrimination.”

Next, Hunt received a set-up question from his mother, Yvonne Hunt Perry: “Why should I vote for you as a student? Some people may say you’re inexperienced. Persuade me that you are the candidate for District 2.”

“Let’s bring it right here to Greensboro, North Carolina,” her son replied. “Feb. 1, 1960. You had four freshman at NC A&T. The Greensboro sit-in movement changed the nation. As a 24-year-old within the same city, I know that together with the university and the community we can change the city.” 

Kee took advantage of the opening, referencing Hunt’s role in a civil disobedience action with the Spirit of the Sit-In Movement in which Hunt and others took seats on city council during a break in a May 2010 meeting. Hunt had taken the mayor’s seat and banged the gavel, signaling for the student activists to begin a discussion of issues such as alleged police corruption and the landfill, which they believed were being neglected at the time. Later, Hunt and others were voluntarily arrested.

“What was your purpose and accomplishment?” Kee asked.

“On that day, I took a stand – something that is needed at times,” Hunt said. “Maybe you can understand that, councilman. Sometimes you just have to take a stand.”

In his introductory remarks, Hunt suggested that Kee has not taken a strong enough stance against reopening the White Street Landfill.

“That conversation is a nonstarter, as far as I’m concerned,” Hunt said. “I don’t believe that should have ever come up, and I believe we need the right leadership, someone that’s willing to stand and say, ‘No, this is wrong.’”

Mayor Pro Tem Nancy Vaughan, who is seeking reelection as an at-large candidate, took umbrage at Hunt’s remarks and came to her fellow council member’s defense.

“When you were 10 years old, Mr. Kee was coming before the city council relentlessly to close that landfill,” said Vaughan, who was serving on council at the time. “I don’t think there was a greater advocate for closing the landfill and organizing the concerned citizens of the northeast. I think that when it comes the landfill the community really owes him a large debt for the work that he did 10 years ago and the work that he continues to do.”

Hunt responded, “As a councilman, I did not see that. I appreciate the work that was done 10 years ago, but right now in 2011 and 2010, I believe that the councilman was the last person to sign on against the landfill, and followed public opinion.”

Kee also challenged his other challenger, Dan Fischer, who sought to exploit the same perceived weakness. Kee asked Fischer what he would have done differently had he been the one in the District 2 seat over the past two years.

“Even though I want a win-win situation, if I have to I will get down and dirty,” said Fischer, who served as a Navy corpsman for 20 years. "I will put my foot down. I will work with anybody to get the answers I want. Working with the Marines, I found ways to go through them, over, under, around, and to blast a hole in it. I am willing to do most anything to see what is right for a community, happen.”

In addition to the three District 2 candidates, a parade of at-large contenders stood before the audience. Melvin DuBose, a facilitator, said at the end of the program that any candidate who was in favor of reopening the landfill or who wasn’t talking about economic development should forget about receiving residents’ votes.

Marikay Abuzuaiter, who has made two previous attempts to win election at large and who has previously enjoyed strong support from east Greensboro, gave a passionate testimony to her stance on the landfill.

“Opening the landfill is the worst thing this city could have ever considered doing,” she said. “I took a stand very, very early on this because I had been on a landfill research committee about two years ago. And what I found out what a landfill can do to the environment, to the people – if anyone ever tells you a landfill does not leak, that is untrue.

“I had somebody tell me in a private meeting: ‘Well, you’re getting tagged on the [human relations] commission as ‘the landfill lady,’” Abuzuaiter recounted. “And I said, ‘Okay.’ ‘And you’re also being toxic.’ I said, ‘Okay.’ And this person said, ‘What do you want your legacy to be: The landfill lady or toxic? What’s it going to be?' I said, ‘No, I want my legacy to be I do what is right.”

Cyndy Hayworth, a well-funded at-large candidate who was recently elected chair of the zoning commission, also told voters she is opposed to reopening the landfill.

“This community trusted the decision that the council made several years ago,” Hayworth said. “And through that trust they built a community around the decision not to accept household waste. They built a new library. They built new things. They built up a community. And it’s just not right to come back and say, ‘Now, we’re going to reopen it.’ So my decision – and it might be a moot point at this point – would be to not reopen the landfill and to look at the alternatives that we have. One would be to renegotiate a contract. They’ve already said that they could do what they’re doing for less money and save the taxpayers money. We need to get to the table with Rockingham and Randolph and Caswell counties and start looking at a regional solution to this problem.”

Jo Isler, who serves as Abuzuaiter’s campaign manager and who lives in District 2, challenged Hayworth on her association with Danny Thompson, an at-large Councilman who was elected two years ago after telling voters he was opposed to reopening the landfill. Thompson is seeking reelection, but did not attend the candidate forum.

“Two years ago you endorsed Danny Thompson in the newspaper,” Isler said. “Do you regret that, because he seems to be the force behind reopening the landfill?”

“I did write a letter of support to Danny – a letter to the editor,” Hayworth said. “I think that you could agree with me that when you have a candidate that has no voting record, who has nothing to look at except what their platform is, and when you hear a good platform, and you think, ‘Well, that’s a great candidate,’ and you vote for them and they get in office and then you’re very disappointed. I think every person here could agree that we’ve seen candidates that we voted for and we did not agree with them once they got in office. I would not have voted on issues the same as Danny would.”

Isler also challenged at-large candidate Jean Austin Brown on her stance on the landfill. 

“I’ve not been privy to some of these conversations about opening the landfill,” Brown said. “So I’ll need to know more information. I think I won’t be voting on that because it’s already a done deal, from what I understand. At this point I honestly can’t say what I would do. I’ve talked to people on both sides. It’s not that I’m wishy-washy, but I’m listening to both sides of it.”

Yvonne Johnson, who served one term as mayor before being defeated by Bill Knight in her 2009 reelection bid, is running at large this year. She lives in northeast Greensboro and holds a longstanding record in support of keeping the landfill closed.

“I also feel very strongly that we do not need to reopen the White Street Landfill to municipal solid waste,” she said. “I think it will hurt us economically. Northeast Greensboro is one of the areas of Greensboro that has the greatest potential for growth in this city. We’ve built up the rest. We have our water system in the north. And years ago we put in the infrastructure because we knew it was northeast Greensboro that had the potential.”

Marlando Demonte Pridgen, a political newcomer who is also seeking an at-large seat, told the gathering that he will take a fresh and innovative approach to economic development.

Kee, the incumbent in District 2, told Pridgen: “A lot of your ideas are already being implemented." 

Vaughan came to the event with momentum from a court decision earlier in the day to uphold her right to vote on a proposed contract to reopen the landfill. She has said she will vote the contract down, and her participation effectively blocks a slim majority from reopening the landfill.

Vaughan, who has not traditionally enjoyed deep support in east Greensboro, received a round of applause when she announced the decision. She cited her participation in a 2001 vote to close the landfill, and appealed for unity.

“When the landfill came before us it was really seen as a people issue,” Vaughan said. “It wasn’t a dollars-and-cents issue. It was a people issue and what was going to be best for the community. And that was a unanimous vote to close the landfill. Do you know: We did not get one call from anybody saying, ‘How could you do that? You are not being good stewards of our tax dollars.' I think that was a different time then. I think people really valued neighborhoods and valued what was going on in other people’s lives.”

Vaughan also atoned for her role in approving a map considered by many to be a scheme to gerrymander the city to the conservative majority’s advantage.

“We had an issue with redistricting,” she said. “We passed a map. It was a bad map. I agree with that. There was a public outcry. And I was not ashamed to say, ‘We made a mistake.’ And within 36 hours I said, ‘We need to revisit this.’ And we came up with a much better plan. I listen to my constituents. When you say we’ve done something wrong, I don’t cover my ears, and say, ‘Well, that’s the way it is.’ If you think we’ve done something wrong, you’ve got an advocate in me. I listen to you, and I think I’ve proved that by my actions.

“You know, we are really at a crossroads right now as a city," Vaughan continued. "We can dig our heels in and we can keep our extreme left and our extreme right. You know, if we want to be successful we have to come together and we have to be willing to make broad steps. And sometimes broad steps cost money. But you know, we have to consider everything because if we keep just doing business as usual we’re going to stagnate.”

 


Posted by Jordan Green on 9/17/2011   

Tags: C. Bradley Hunt II, Cyndy Hayworth, Dan Fischer, Jean Brown, Jim Kee, Marikay Abuzuaiter, Marlando Demonte Pridgen, Yvonne Johnson
 